[Home] [Articles] [Benchmarks] [Information] [Resources] [VPR]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 [Articles] Pentium Secrets

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Pentium collects lots of information about code execution, and now you
can get access to it

Terje Mathisen

When Intel announced the Pentium processor in March 1993, I immediately
ordered the three-volume user's manual. For people like me, who wanted to
write the fastest, most efficient code possible, volume 3 appeared to be
the most useful. Imagine my chagrin, then, when every interesting section
on optimization contained a reference to Appendix H, which consists of a
single, illuminating paragraph stating that the information I desired is
"considered Intel confidential and proprietary." This information is only
available to those willing to sign a nondisclosure agreement with Intel.

From the published Pentium documentation and other sources, I knew that the
Pentium could return detailed statistics on all major parts of its
CPU--just the type of information that is essential for code optimization.
The best place to look for such information was in the new, documented
RDMSR (read machine-specific register) and WRMSR (write machine-specific
register) instructions. These instructions work on a set of 64-bit MSRs
(machine-specific registers) contained in the Pentium.

To use RDMSR and WRMSR, you move the register identifier (i.e., the number)
of the desired MSR into register ECX. Invoking RDMSR will then transfer the
contents of the indicated MSR into the paired registers EDX:EAX, while
WRMSR copies EDX:EAX into the internal register. The Pentium user's manual
documents MSRs 0h, 1h, and 0Eh, and also states that MSRs 3h and 0Fh, as
well as values above 13h, are reserved and illegal. I felt sure the
undocumented registers held the key to the optimization information I
wanted.

As the first step in deciphering the undocumented registers, I wrote a test
program that dumped the contents of the MSRs. (I quickly discovered that
any attempt to read MSR 0Ah halted my PC, so until somebody finds a use for
it, I suggest leaving that one alone.) Running the test program, I found
that the content of most of the registers was static. The exception was MSR
10h, which was changing rapidly indeed. Guessing that MSR 10h might contain
a running cycle count, I divided the value contained in 10h by my
processor's 60-MHz clock speed. My hunch paid off when I ended up with a
nice display of the number of seconds since I had last powered-up.

Using RDMSRto read MSR10h gives you the highest precision counter available
to 80x86 programs. By reading the value in MSR10h before and after a block
of code, you'll know exactly how long the processor took to execute the
block, down to the last cycle.

These results parallel the ones you get when you use the RDTSC (read time
stamp counter) (0F/31) instruction. Mike Schmid revealed the existence of
this instruction in the January issue of Dr. Dobb's Journal. As with many
of the MSRs, RDTSC is not documented anywhere, except in the instruction
decoding tables, where it fits right between WRMSR (0F/30) and RDMSR
(0F/32). A quick comparison of RDTSC and RDMSR shows that both access the
same running cycle count, with RDTSC being an alternative and slightly
faster way to retrieve the data.

Unfortunately, RDMSR and RDTSC are kernel mode (ring 0) instructions. My PC
crashed when I ran these instructions inside a DOS box or with a memory
manager. I am guessing that you can enable ring 3 access to RDTSC, maybe by
using MSR 0Eh (test register 12 in the Intel manual), which is documented
as "new feature control," or MSR 0Dh, which seems to contain a value
similar to MSR 0Eh; however, I have yet to discover how to enable ring 3
access.

Counter Culture

My next break in deciphering the MSRs came during a visit to a U.S-based
developer. There, I saw a utility that displayed a number of interesting
statistics about programs running on a Pentium machine. The utility could
dynamically display one or two internal counters from a list of 38
different hardware events. The statistics were all related to different
aspects of processor performance and were just the information I needed to
perform informed code optimization on the Pentium.

For example, when the developers used the utility to profile another
program, the utility revealed that the target program was generating a lot
of accesses to misaligned memory variables. A simple recompile of the
target program, using doubleword (4-byte) alignment, resulted in a 2
1/2-times speedup.

The developers realized that the utility would be useful for other
programmers, so they obtained permission from Intel to distribute the
program, as long as the source code was kept secret. I obtained a copy of
the executable file to see if I could figure out how it accessed the
Pentium statistics.

My first obstacle was creating a disassembled listing. I converted the
program code into a list of Define Byte (DB xxh) statements. I encapsulated
this naked code within an assembly program wrapper, ran Borland's TASM
(Turbo Assembler), and then converted the object file into a listing. Next,
I located the RDMSR and WRMSR byte sequences (the Pentium wasn't around
when my object disassembler was written) and started working backwards from
there. After a few days of tracing and testing, I found out how the
internal counters work.

The controller for the Pentium hardware counters is MSR 11h; more
specifically, the lower 32 bits of MSR 11h. The first 16 bits determines
the data that will end up in MSR 12h, while the second 16 bits determines
the counter that will report its results in MSR 13h, which is the
nineteenth and last MSR on a Pentium. An obvious extension for Intel's next
CPU, the P6 (Hexium, anyone?) would be to use all 64 bits of MSR 11h and
add two more stat counters as MSR 14h and 15h. The lack of more MSRs limits
you to accessing no more than two counters at a time.

The encoding of each 16-bit block of MSR 11h is identical. The first 6 bits
(0 to 5) are an index into the list of available hardware events (see the
table "Pentium Counters" on page 191). When set, bit 6 enables counting of
events in the operating-system rings 0, 1, and 2, while bit 7 enables ring
3 monitoring.

Bit 8 indicates whether you want to collect the number of hardware events
or the CPU cycles that the events use. Thus by setting up both counters to
track the same item, with one counting events and the other counting
cycles, you get a measurement of the average time it takes to complete the
tracked event.

Using this information, I wrote P5Stat, a profiling program that accesses
the Pentium hardware counters. P5Stat accepts another program name on the
command line and then sets out to execute the indicated program 20 times.
The first time through ensures that all the caches are loaded, while on
each of the next 19 runs P5Stat collects two of the 38 different hardware
counters available. After the last run, P5Stat dumps all the results to
standard output, where it can be redirected to a file for later use.

P5Stat has proven useful in code optimization. For example, I recently used
it on WC 5.26, a freeware word count program that I wrote almost three
years ago. I discovered that without optimization the dual-pipeline Pentium
gave a 43 percent speedup compared to running all the code in a single pipe
(i.e., on a 486). Using P5Stat to identify crucial bottlenecks, I
rearranged the inner loop of the counting function for the new version, WC
5.40. This required more instructions, but P5Stat showed that I had
achieved nearly 100 percent filling of the dual pipes, resulting in an
actual counting speed of 1.5 cycles per byte, or 40 MBps on my 60-MHz
Pentium. This is a 33 percent speedup over the previous Pentium version of
WC. (See the "Program Listings" on page 9 for information on how to obtain
P5Stat and WC 5.40.)

The profiling information available to Pentium programmers is a powerful
aid in software development. With the information in this article, you can
access these features and use them to identify bottlenecks and inefficient
coding practices in your programs. I hope Intel makes official information
available to all programmers and that such useful features are incorporated
into other architectures such as Alpha, PowerPC, and SPARC.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Pentium Counters

Index   Name
0       Data read
1       Data write
2       Data TLB (translation look-aside buffer) miss
3       Data read miss
4       Data write miss
5       Write (hit) to M or E state lines
6       Data cache lines written back
7       Data cache snoops
8       Data cache snoop hits
9       Memory accesses in both pipes
A       Bank conflicts
B       Misaligned data memory references
C       Code read
D       Code TLB miss
E       Code cache miss
F       Any segment register load
12      Branches
13      BTB (branch target buffer) hits
14      Taken branch or BTB hit
15      Pipeline flushes
16      Instructions executed
17      Instructions executed in the v-pipe
18      Bus utilization (clocks)
19      Pipeline stalled by write backup
1A      Pipeline stalled by data memory read
1B      Pipeline stalled by write to E or M line
1C      Locked bus cycle
1D      I/O read or write cycle
1E      Noncacheable memory references
1F      AGI (Address Generation Interlock)
22      Floating-point operations
23      Breakpoint 0 match
24      Breakpoint 1 match
25      Breakpoint 2 match
26      Breakpoint 3 match
27      Hardware interrupts
28      Data read or data write
29      Data read miss or data write miss

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Using the Hardware Counters

First, define macros for the new instructions:
        RDMSR MACRO
                db 0fh, 032h
        ENDM
        WRMSR MACRO
                db 0fh, 030h
        ENDM

Then when you want to use the specific counters, I suggest that you read the current value of MSR 11h first and only modify the part you need to set up your co
        mov ecx,11h
        RDMSR
        and eax,0FE00FE00h; save the upper 7 bits in each half
        or eax,Nr1_idx+Nr1_ctrl+(Nr2_idx+Nr2_ctrl) shl 16
        WRMSR

Now any read of MSR 12 will retrieve the current value of hardware event Nr1, while MSR 13h contains event Nr2:
        mov ecx, 13h
        RDMSR
        push edx
        push eax
        dec ecx
        RDMSR
        push edx
        push eax

Finally, insert the code to be tested here.
        mov ecx, 12h
        RDMSR
        pop ebx
        sub eax,ebx
        pop ebx
        sbb edx,ebx
        call disp64; display first count
        inc ecx
        rdmsr
        pop ebx
        sub eax,ebx
        pop ebx
        sbb edx,ebx
        call disp64; display second count

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Terje Mathisen is a systems architect for Norsk Hydro in Norway and has
been developing high-performance IBM-compatible software since 1981. You
can reach him on the Internet or BIX at terjem@hda.hydro.com.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
 [Uplevel] [Prev]  [Next] [Search]  [Comment]   Copyright © 1994-1996
 [Logo]
