     INSTRUCTION PAIRING RULES for the PENTIUM(TM) PROCESSOR

From the Pentium Processor User's Manual, Volume 1:  Pentium
Processor Data Book, section 3.1.2.


The Pentium processor can issue one or two instructions every
clock.  In order to issue two instructions simultaneously they
must satisfy the following conditions:

-> Both instructions in the pair must be "simple" as defined
   below
-> There must be no read-after-write or write-after-write
   register dependencies between them
-> Neither instruction may contain both a displacement and an
   immediate
-> Instructions with prefixes (other than 0F of JCC instructions)
   can only occur in the u-pipe

Simple instructions are entirely hardwired; they do not require
any microcode control and, in general, execute in one clock.  The
exceptions are the ALU mem,reg and ALU reg,mem instructions which
are two and three clock operations respectively.  Sequencing
hardware is used to allow them to function as simple
instructions.  The following integer instructions are considered
simple and may be paired:

1.  mov reg, reg/mem/imm
2.  mov mem, reg/imm
3.  alu reg, reg/mem/imm
4.  alu mem, reg/imm
5.  inc reg/mem
6.  dec reg/mem
7.  push reg/mem
8.  pop reg
9.  lea reg, mem
10.  jmp/call/jcc near
11.  nop

In addition, conditional and unconditional branches may be paired
only if they occur as the second instruction in the pair.  They
may not be paired with the next sequential instruction.  Also,
SHIFT/ROT by 1 and SHIFT by imm may pair as the first instruction
in a pair.

The register dependencies that prohibit instruction pairing
include implicit dependencies via registers or flags not
explicitly encoded in the instruction.  For example, an ALU
instruction in the u-pipe (which sets the flags) may not be
paired with an ADC or a SBB instruction in the v-pipe.  There are
two exceptions to this rule.  The first is the commonly occurring
sequence of compare and branch which may be paired.  The second
exception is pairs of pushes or pops.  Although these
instructions have an implicit dependency on the stack pointer,
special hardware is included to allow these common operations to
proceed in parallel.

Although in general two paired instructions may proceed in
parallel independently, there is an exception for paired "read-
modify-write" instructions.  Read-modify-write instructions are
ALU operations with an operand in memory.  When two of these
instructions are paired there is a sequencing delay of two clocks
in addition to the three clocks required to execute the
individual instructions.

Although instructions may execute in parallel their behavior as
seen by the programmer is exactly the same as if they were
executed sequentially (as on the Intel486(TM) CPU).
